README.md, before:

# Firefly ADHD Focus App

A lightweight Next.js application that helps ADHD users overcome task paralysis through AI-powered task breakdown and visual focus timers. Built for immediate action - timer starts in <1 second, works offline, with progressive enhancement.

## Key Features

- **Instant Focus**: Timer starts immediately, never blocked by AI processing
- **Task Breakdown**: AI generates 60-second first steps and actionable next actions
- **Editable Actions**: Modify, delete, and add custom actions with AI time estimation (V1)
- **Smart Time Estimates**: AI provides realistic time estimates for ADHD users with confidence levels
- **Visual Timer**: Shrinking disc with 25/45/50 minute presets or custom durations
- **Enhanced Timer Controls**: Mark actions complete early, navigate between actions, comprehensive keyboard shortcuts
- **Sound System**: Optional timer ticking, session alarms, and break notifications with full customization and robust error handling
- **Automatic Breaks**: Pomodoro-style break management (5min short, 15min long breaks)
- **Variance Tracking**: Compare planned vs actual time with encouraging feedback
- **Offline-First Design**: Full functionality works offline with automatic sync when reconnected
- **Progressive Enhancement**: Core functionality works without AI or authentication
- **ADHD-Optimized**: Reduced motion, high contrast, minimal cognitive overhead, customizable audio
- **Dashboard Analytics**: Track progress, streaks, and personal records (when signed in)

## Quick Start

### Development (Fast Iteration)
```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install

# Copy environment template
cp .env.example .env.local

# Set up environment variables (see Configuration below)
# Start development server
bun run dev
```

### Production Build & Deploy
```bash
# Build for production (stable)
npm run build

# Start production server
npm run start
```

### Configuration

Create `.env.local` with your API keys:

```bash
# Supabase (for auth & data persistence)
NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_URL=your_supabase_url
NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_ANON_KEY=your_supabase_anon_key

# Google AI Studio (for task suggestions)
GOOGLE_AI_API_KEY=your_google_ai_api_key
```

**Note**: App works without these keys - timer and local state function offline.

## Demo Steps

### Complete User Journey
1. **Landing Page**: Visit `http://localhost:3000` - see hero, features, demo preview
2. **Task Input**: Click "Get Started" → enter a goal (e.g., "Write project proposal")
3. **AI Suggestions**: See 60-second first step + next actions (or fallback if offline)
4. **Edit Actions** (V1): Click to edit action text, delete unwanted actions, add custom ones
5. **Get Time Estimates** (V1): Click "Update with AI" to get realistic time estimates for each action
6. **Sound Settings**: Click sound icon to customize ticking, alarms, and break notifications
7. **Timer Start**: Click "Start Focus Timer" → choose preset or use AI-estimated duration
8. **Focus Session**: Visual countdown with optional ticking sound, pause/resume/stop/mark complete controls, keyboard shortcuts (Space, Enter, Escape, Arrow keys)
9. **Session Complete**: Hear completion alarm, automatic break timer with suggestions
10. **Results**: See variance analysis and encouraging feedback
11. **Dashboard**: Sign in with Google → automatically redirected to three-column dashboard with:
    - **Navigation & Quick Stats**: Left sidebar with today's focus time, current streak, completion rate
    - **Ready to Focus**: Center section with multiple session start options (Quick Focus 25min, Deep Work 50min, Custom Goal)
    - **Personal Records**: Right sidebar showcasing achievements (longest session, best week, streaks)

### Testing Offline Mode
- Disconnect internet → timer still works with fallback suggestions
- Create action sessions and complete actions while offline
- Reconnect internet → automatic sync of all offline work
- All core functionality available without authentication
- See `docs/offline-sync-system.md` for detailed offline capabilities

## Architecture

**Tech Stack**: Next.js 14 + Bun (dev) + npm (prod) + Tailwind + Supabase + Google AI

**Key Principle**: Progressive enhancement - timer works immediately, AI enhances the experience

### Timer Architecture

The timer system uses a dual-component architecture:

- **Timer Component**: Smart router that selects appropriate timer implementation
- **RegularTimer**: Basic timer functionality for standard focus sessions
- **ActionTimer**: Enhanced timer with action tracking and session management

This separation ensures clean code organization while supporting both basic and advanced use cases. See `docs/timer-architecture.md` for detailed technical documentation.

### Dashboard Architecture

The dashboard features a modern three-column layout optimized for ADHD users:

- **Left Sidebar**: Integrated navigation with quick stats (Today's focus, Current streak, Completion rate)
- **Center Content**: Primary actions (Ready to Focus section with quick options), weekly stats, recent sessions
- **Right Sidebar**: Personal records showcase with achievement cards (Longest session, Best week, Current/Longest streaks)
- **ADHD-Optimized Design**: Clear information hierarchy, reduced cognitive load, positive reinforcement
- **Progressive Enhancement**: Works with or without historical data, encouraging empty states

See `docs/dashboard-analytics-system.md` for detailed documentation.

## Development Commands

```bash
# Development (fast iteration with Bun)
bun run dev

# Production build (stable with npm)
npm run build && npm run start

# Database setup
bun run db:setup

# Testing
bun run test
bun run verify:testing

# Authentication verification
bun run verify:auth
```

### Debugging

The app includes comprehensive console logging for development and troubleshooting:

- **Authentication Context**: Enhanced logging for session initialization, auth state changes, and error tracking
- **Session Saving**: Monitor session data persistence and user authentication
- **Authentication Flow**: Production-ready OAuth callback with load balancer support and error handling
- **Dashboard Authentication**: Enhanced timing for OAuth callback processing with delayed redirect logic
- **Dashboard Analytics**: Detailed logging of session queries, data processing, and metrics calculations
  - Session count and data structure validation
  - User authentication status and token handling
  - Statistics computation and personal records calculation

Open browser dev tools to view detailed logs during development. See `docs/auth-setup.md` for authentication debugging and `docs/testing-guide.md` for other debugging scenarios.

## Manual QA Checklist

**Core User Journey** (5 minutes):
1. ✅ Landing page loads with hero, features, demo preview
2. ✅ Click "Get Started" → smooth scroll to task input
3. ✅ Enter goal → see task created confirmation
4. ✅ AI suggestions appear (or fallback if offline)
5. ✅ Click "Start Focus Timer" → timer starts within 1 second
6. ✅ Visual countdown works, pause/resume functional
7. ✅ Stop timer → see variance summary with encouraging message
8. ✅ Session saved to database (if authenticated)

**V1 Enhanced Actions Journey** (additional 3 minutes):
1. ✅ Click to edit AI-generated actions inline
2. ✅ Delete unwanted actions and add custom ones
3. ✅ Click "Update with AI" → see time estimates with confidence levels
4. ✅ Select action with estimate → timer uses custom duration
5. ✅ Action progress tracked and synced to dashboard

**Sound Features Journey** (additional 2 minutes):
1. ✅ Click sound icon → access comprehensive sound settings
2. ✅ Test ticking, alarm, and break notification sounds
3. ✅ Adjust volume and enable/disable individual sound types
4. ✅ Start timer → hear optional ticking during focus session
5. ✅ Complete session → hear completion alarm and automatic break timer
6. ✅ Experience Pomodoro-style break management (5min/15min breaks)

**Note**: V1 TypeScript interfaces are now implemented for full type safety across the enhanced actions feature.

**Progressive Enhancement**:
- ✅ Timer works without AI suggestions
- ✅ Timer works without authentication
- ✅ Offline mode provides fallback suggestions
- ✅ High contrast and reduced motion preferences work

**Authentication Flow**:
- ✅ Google OAuth sign-in with production-ready callback handling
- ✅ Load balancer support for deployment environments
- ✅ User-friendly error handling with troubleshooting guidance
- ✅ Successful authentication redirects directly to dashboard
- ✅ Enhanced dashboard authentication with OAuth callback timing support
- ✅ Dashboard shows analytics and session history with stable CSS implementation
- ✅ App works fully without signing in

## Deployment

**Vercel/Netlify Ready**: 
- Build: `npm run build`
- Environment: Add Supabase + Google AI keys
- OAuth: Configure redirect URLs in Supabase dashboard

Commit message:

Enhance timer functionality with new time extension and action navigation features. Introduce options for users to add time when the timer reaches zero and navigate between actions with confirmation dialogs. Update documentation to reflect these changes.

README.md, after:

# Firefly ADHD Focus App

A lightweight Next.js application that helps ADHD users overcome task paralysis through AI-powered task breakdown and visual focus timers. Built for immediate action - timer starts in <1 second, works offline, with progressive enhancement.

## Key Features

- **Instant Focus**: Timer starts immediately, never blocked by AI processing
- **Task Breakdown**: AI generates 60-second first steps and actionable next actions
- **Editable Actions**: Modify, delete, and add custom actions with AI time estimation (V1)
- **Smart Time Estimates**: AI provides realistic time estimates for ADHD users with confidence levels
- **Visual Timer**: Shrinking disc with 25/45/50 minute presets or custom durations
- **Enhanced Timer Controls**: Mark actions complete early, navigate between actions, time extensions, comprehensive keyboard shortcuts
- **Sound System**: Optional timer ticking, session alarms, and break notifications with full customization and robust error handling
- **Automatic Breaks**: Pomodoro-style break management (5min short, 15min long breaks)
- **Variance Tracking**: Compare planned vs actual time with encouraging feedback
- **Offline-First Design**: Full functionality works offline with automatic sync when reconnected
- **Progressive Enhancement**: Core functionality works without AI or authentication
- **ADHD-Optimized**: Reduced motion, high contrast, minimal cognitive overhead, customizable audio
- **Dashboard Analytics**: Track progress, streaks, and personal records (when signed in)

## Quick Start

### Development (Fast Iteration)
```bash
# Install dependencies
bun install

# Copy environment template
cp .env.example .env.local

# Set up environment variables (see Configuration below)
# Start development server
bun run dev
```

### Production Build & Deploy
```bash
# Build for production (stable)
npm run build

# Start production server
npm run start
```

### Configuration

Create `.env.local` with your API keys:

```bash
# Supabase (for auth & data persistence)
NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_URL=your_supabase_url
NEXT_PUBLIC_SUPABASE_ANON_KEY=your_supabase_anon_key

# Google AI Studio (for task suggestions)
GOOGLE_AI_API_KEY=your_google_ai_api_key
```

**Note**: App works without these keys - timer and local state function offline.

## Demo Steps

### Complete User Journey
1. **Landing Page**: Visit `http://localhost:3000` - see hero, features, demo preview
2. **Task Input**: Click "Get Started" → enter a goal (e.g., "Write project proposal")
3. **AI Suggestions**: See 60-second first step + next actions (or fallback if offline)
4. **Edit Actions** (V1): Click to edit action text, delete unwanted actions, add custom ones
5. **Get Time Estimates** (V1): Click "Update with AI" to get realistic time estimates for each action
6. **Sound Settings**: Click sound icon to customize ticking, alarms, and break notifications
7. **Timer Start**: Click "Start Focus Timer" → choose preset or use AI-estimated duration
8. **Focus Session**: Visual countdown with optional ticking sound, pause/resume/stop/mark complete controls, keyboard shortcuts (Space, Enter, Escape, Arrow keys)
9. **Time Extensions** (V1.1): When timer reaches zero, choose to add 5/10/15 minutes or custom amount, with extension history tracking
10. **Action Navigation** (V1.1): Use Previous/Next buttons or arrow keys to switch between actions with confirmation dialogs
11. **Session Complete**: Hear completion alarm, automatic break timer with suggestions
12. **Results**: See variance analysis and encouraging feedback
13. **Dashboard**: Sign in with Google → automatically redirected to three-column dashboard with:
    - **Navigation & Quick Stats**: Left sidebar with today's focus time, current streak, completion rate
    - **Ready to Focus**: Center section with multiple session start options (Quick Focus 25min, Deep Work 50min, Custom Goal)
    - **Personal Records**: Right sidebar showcasing achievements (longest session, best week, streaks)

### Testing Offline Mode
- Disconnect internet → timer still works with fallback suggestions
- Create action sessions and complete actions while offline
- Reconnect internet → automatic sync of all offline work
- All core functionality available without authentication
- See `docs/offline-sync-system.md` for detailed offline capabilities

## Architecture

**Tech Stack**: Next.js 14 + Bun (dev) + npm (prod) + Tailwind + Supabase + Google AI

**Key Principle**: Progressive enhancement - timer works immediately, AI enhances the experience

### Timer Architecture

The timer system uses a dual-component architecture:

- **Timer Component**: Smart router that selects appropriate timer implementation
- **RegularTimer**: Basic timer functionality for standard focus sessions
- **ActionTimer**: Enhanced timer with action tracking and session management

This separation ensures clean code organization while supporting both basic and advanced use cases. See `docs/timer-architecture.md` for detailed technical documentation.

### Dashboard Architecture

The dashboard features a modern three-column layout optimized for ADHD users:

- **Left Sidebar**: Integrated navigation with quick stats (Today's focus, Current streak, Completion rate)
- **Center Content**: Primary actions (Ready to Focus section with quick options), weekly stats, recent sessions
- **Right Sidebar**: Personal records showcase with achievement cards (Longest session, Best week, Current/Longest streaks)
- **ADHD-Optimized Design**: Clear information hierarchy, reduced cognitive load, positive reinforcement
- **Progressive Enhancement**: Works with or without historical data, encouraging empty states

See `docs/dashboard-analytics-system.md` for detailed documentation.

## Development Commands

```bash
# Development (fast iteration with Bun)
bun run dev

# Production build (stable with npm)
npm run build && npm run start

# Database setup
bun run db:setup

# Testing
bun run test
bun run verify:testing

# Authentication verification
bun run verify:auth
```

### Debugging

The app includes comprehensive console logging for development and troubleshooting:

- **Authentication Context**: Enhanced logging for session initialization, auth state changes, and error tracking
- **Session Saving**: Monitor session data persistence and user authentication
- **Authentication Flow**: Production-ready OAuth callback with load balancer support and error handling
- **Dashboard Authentication**: Enhanced timing for OAuth callback processing with delayed redirect logic
- **Dashboard Analytics**: Detailed logging of session queries, data processing, and metrics calculations
  - Session count and data structure validation
  - User authentication status and token handling
  - Statistics computation and personal records calculation

Open browser dev tools to view detailed logs during development. See `docs/auth-setup.md` for authentication debugging and `docs/testing-guide.md` for other debugging scenarios.

## Manual QA Checklist

**Core User Journey** (5 minutes):
1. ✅ Landing page loads with hero, features, demo preview
2. ✅ Click "Get Started" → smooth scroll to task input
3. ✅ Enter goal → see task created confirmation
4. ✅ AI suggestions appear (or fallback if offline)
5. ✅ Click "Start Focus Timer" → timer starts within 1 second
6. ✅ Visual countdown works, pause/resume functional
7. ✅ Stop timer → see variance summary with encouraging message
8. ✅ Session saved to database (if authenticated)

**V1 Enhanced Actions Journey** (additional 3 minutes):
1. ✅ Click to edit AI-generated actions inline
2. ✅ Delete unwanted actions and add custom ones
3. ✅ Click "Update with AI" → see time estimates with confidence levels
4. ✅ Select action with estimate → timer uses custom duration
5. ✅ Action progress tracked and synced to dashboard

**Sound Features Journey** (additional 2 minutes):
1. ✅ Click sound icon → access comprehensive sound settings
2. ✅ Test ticking, alarm, and break notification sounds
3. ✅ Adjust volume and enable/disable individual sound types
4. ✅ Start timer → hear optional ticking during focus session
5. ✅ Complete session → hear completion alarm and automatic break timer
6. ✅ Experience Pomodoro-style break management (5min/15min breaks)

**Note**: V1 TypeScript interfaces are now implemented for full type safety across the enhanced actions feature.

**Progressive Enhancement**:
- ✅ Timer works without AI suggestions
- ✅ Timer works without authentication
- ✅ Offline mode provides fallback suggestions
- ✅ High contrast and reduced motion preferences work

**Authentication Flow**:
- ✅ Google OAuth sign-in with production-ready callback handling
- ✅ Load balancer support for deployment environments
- ✅ User-friendly error handling with troubleshooting guidance
- ✅ Successful authentication redirects directly to dashboard
- ✅ Enhanced dashboard authentication with OAuth callback timing support
- ✅ Dashboard shows analytics and session history with stable CSS implementation
- ✅ App works fully without signing in

## Deployment

**Vercel/Netlify Ready**: 
- Build: `npm run build`
- Environment: Add Supabase + Google AI keys
- OAuth: Configure redirect URLs in Supabase dashboard
