docs/enhanced-timer-controls.md, before:

# Enhanced Timer Controls (V1.1 Feature)

## Overview

The Enhanced Timer Controls feature extends the basic timer functionality with advanced action management capabilities. This addresses ADHD users' need for flexible task completion and better control over their focus sessions.

## New Timer Controls

### Mark Complete Button

**Purpose**: Allows users to mark the current action as complete before the timer expires

**Visual Design**:
- Blue circular button with checkmark icon
- Positioned between pause/resume and stop buttons
- Only visible when `showMarkComplete` is true and an action is active
- Consistent styling with other timer control buttons

**Behavior**:
- Calculates actual time spent on the current action
- Marks the action as completed in the session
- Automatically moves to the next action or completes the session
- Triggers confirmation modal for user feedback

**Keyboard Shortcut**: `Enter` key

### Enhanced Control Interface

The TimerControls component now accepts additional props:

```typescript
interface TimerControlsProps {
  timerState: TimerState;
  onPause: () => void;
  onResume: () => void;
  onStop: () => void;
  onMarkComplete?: () => void;        // New: Mark current action complete
  onPrevious?: () => void;            // New: Navigate to previous action
  onNext?: () => void;                // New: Navigate to next action
  stopLabel?: string;
  showMarkComplete?: boolean;         // New: Controls visibility of mark complete button
  showNavigation?: boolean;           // New: Controls visibility of navigation buttons
  canGoPrevious?: boolean;            // New: Controls previous button enabled state
  canGoNext?: boolean;                // New: Controls next button enabled state
}
```

## Keyboard Shortcuts

The enhanced timer supports comprehensive keyboard navigation:

| Key | Action | Context |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `Space` | Pause/Resume timer | When timer is active |
| `Enter` | Mark current action complete | When timer is active and action exists |
| `Escape` | Stop timer | When timer is active |
| `←` (Left Arrow) | Navigate to previous action | When multiple actions exist |
| `→` (Right Arrow) | Navigate to next action | When multiple actions exist |

### Keyboard Shortcut Display

The timer controls now include a visual guide showing available keyboard shortcuts:

- Dynamically updates based on timer state
- Shows relevant shortcuts only (e.g., "Mark Complete" only appears when applicable)
- Uses `<kbd>` elements for proper semantic markup
- Positioned to the right of the control buttons for easy reference

## Action Navigation Controls

### Previous/Next Action Buttons

**Purpose**: Allow users to switch between actions during a focus session

**Features**:
- Previous button disabled when on first action
- Next button disabled when on last action
- Confirmation modal when switching during active timer
- Automatic timer pause and restart with new action context

**Visual Design**:
- Circular gray buttons with arrow icons positioned on either side of main timer controls
- Smaller size (w-12 h-12) compared to main timer controls for visual hierarchy
- Disabled state with reduced opacity and no hover effects
- Consistent styling with other timer control buttons

**Integration**:
- Controlled via `showNavigation`, `canGoPrevious`, and `canGoNext` props on TimerControls
- Positioned within the main timer controls layout for easy access
- Uses the same confirmation modal system as other navigation methods

## Integration with Action Sessions

### Action Completion Flow

1. **User Triggers Completion**:
   - Clicks "Mark Complete" button
   - Presses `Enter` key
   - Clicks "Complete & Continue" button

2. **Time Calculation**:
   - Calculates actual time spent using drift-corrected elapsed time
   - Accounts for any paused time during the action
   - Rounds up to nearest minute for user-friendly display

3. **Session Updates**:
   - Marks action as completed in action session context
   - Updates total session time spent
   - Syncs progress to dashboard (if online)
   - Stores completion timestamp

4. **Navigation**:
   - Automatically moves to next uncompleted action
   - Starts new timer with next action's estimated duration
   - Completes session if no more actions remain

### Confirmation Modals

**ActionCompletionModal**: Provides feedback when marking actions complete
- Shows action text and time comparison (estimated vs actual)
- Displays next action preview
- Confirms user intent before proceeding

**ActionNavigationModal**: Confirms navigation during active timer
- Warns about interrupting current timer
- Shows target action information
- Allows cancellation to continue current work

## ADHD-Specific Design Considerations

### Cognitive Load Reduction
- **Visual Hierarchy**: Important actions (Complete & Continue) use prominent green styling
- **Contextual Controls**: Only relevant buttons are shown based on current state
- **Clear Labels**: All buttons have descriptive text and ARIA labels

### Flexibility and Control
- **Multiple Completion Methods**: Button click, keyboard shortcut, or combined action
- **Non-Blocking**: Users can switch actions without losing progress
- **Forgiving Interface**: Easy to navigate between actions if priorities change

### Immediate Feedback
- **Visual Confirmation**: Button states change immediately on interaction
- **Progress Updates**: Action completion immediately updates session progress
- **Time Tracking**: Real-time display of actual vs estimated time

## Implementation Details

### Component Structure

```typescript
// Enhanced TimerControls with mark complete and navigation functionality
<TimerControls
  timerState={timerState}
  onPause={pauseTimer}
  onResume={resumeTimer}
  onStop={stopTimer}
  onMarkComplete={handleMarkCompleteClick}  // New prop
  onPrevious={() => handleNavigationClick('previous')}  // New prop
  onNext={() => handleNavigationClick('next')}          // New prop
  showMarkComplete={!!currentAction}        // New prop
  showNavigation={true}                     // New prop
  canGoPrevious={currentActionIndex > 0}    // New prop
  canGoNext={currentActionIndex < actions.length - 1}   // New prop
/>
```

### State Management

The ActionTimer component manages additional state for enhanced controls:

- `showMarkCompleteModal`: Controls confirmation modal visibility
- `showNavigationModal`: Controls navigation confirmation modal
- `navigationDirection`: Tracks intended navigation direction
- `actionStartTimeRef`: Tracks when current action started for time calculation

### Error Handling

- **Network Failures**: Action completion works offline with automatic sync
- **State Corruption**: Graceful fallback to basic timer functionality
- **Invalid Actions**: Validation prevents completion of non-existent actions

## Testing Strategy

### Manual QA Checklist

1. **Mark Complete Functionality**:
   - [ ] "Mark Complete" button appears only when action is active
   - [ ] Button click triggers confirmation modal
   - [ ] `Enter` key works as alternative to button click
   - [ ] Action marked as completed after confirmation
   - [ ] Timer automatically moves to next action

2. **Action Navigation**:
   - [ ] Previous/Next buttons work correctly
   - [ ] Navigation confirmation appears during active timer
   - [ ] Keyboard arrows navigate between actions
   - [ ] Disabled states work correctly at list boundaries

3. **Keyboard Shortcuts**:
   - [ ] All shortcuts work as documented
   - [ ] Shortcut guide updates based on context
   - [ ] No conflicts with browser shortcuts

4. **Time Tracking**:
   - [ ] Actual time calculated correctly including paused time
   - [ ] Action completion updates session progress
   - [ ] Dashboard reflects real-time progress updates

### Accessibility Testing

- **Keyboard Navigation**: All controls accessible via keyboard
- **Screen Reader**: Proper ARIA labels and semantic markup
- **Focus Management**: Clear focus indicators and logical tab order
- **High Contrast**: Controls remain visible in high contrast mode

## Performance Considerations

- **Efficient Updates**: Timer controls only re-render when state changes
- **Debounced Actions**: Rapid button clicks handled gracefully
- **Memory Management**: Event listeners cleaned up on component unmount
- **Offline Support**: All control actions work without network connection

## V1.1 Advanced Timer Controls (NEW)

### Time Extension System

**Purpose**: Allows users to add more time when the timer reaches zero, supporting ADHD users who often need flexible time management.

**Features**:
- **Automatic Extension Modal**: Appears when timer reaches zero
- **Preset Options**: Quick 5, 10, 15 minute extensions
- **Custom Extensions**: User-defined extension amounts (1-60 minutes)
- **Extension Tracking**: Visual history of all extensions added to current action
- **Seamless Integration**: Extensions update timer duration without losing progress

**Implementation**:
```typescript
// TimerExtensionModal provides comprehensive extension options
<TimerExtensionModal
  isOpen={showExtensionModal}
  onClose={() => setShowExtensionModal(false)}
  onExtend={handleExtendTime}
  onComplete={handleCompleteAndContinue}
  actionText={currentAction?.text}
  currentExtensions={currentActionExtensions}
/>
```

### Action Navigation System

**Purpose**: Enables users to switch between actions during focus sessions with proper confirmation and state management.

**Features**:
- **Previous/Next Navigation**: Arrow buttons to move between actions
- **Smart Confirmation**: Modal appears when switching during active timer
- **Progress Preservation**: Current action progress saved when switching
- **Edge Case Handling**: Proper disabled states at list boundaries
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Left/Right arrow keys for quick switching

**Implementation**:
```typescript
// ActionNavigationModal provides context-aware switching
<ActionNavigationModal
  isOpen={showNavigationModal}
  onClose={() => setShowNavigationModal(false)}
  onConfirm={handleConfirmedNavigation}
  direction={navigationDirection}
  currentActionText={currentAction?.text}
  targetActionText={targetAction?.text}
  currentProgress={progressInfo}
/>
```

### Enhanced Action Management

**Complete & Continue Button**: 
- One-click action completion with automatic progression
- Green styling for positive reinforcement
- Combines action marking with navigation flow
- Handles session completion when no more actions remain

**Action Progress Tracking**:
- Real-time session progress indicator
- Visual completion status with checkboxes
- Time tracking per action with extension history
- Dashboard integration for historical analysis

## Future Enhancements

### Short Term
- **Bulk Action Operations**: Mark multiple actions complete at once
- **Custom Shortcuts**: User-configurable keyboard shortcuts
- **Smart Time Suggestions**: AI-powered extension recommendations

### Long Term
- **Voice Commands**: Voice-activated timer controls for hands-free operation
- **Gesture Support**: Touch gestures for mobile timer control
- **Adaptive Timing**: AI learns user patterns to suggest optimal durations

## Migration Notes

### Backward Compatibility

The enhanced timer controls maintain full backward compatibility:
- Existing TimerControls usage continues to work
- New props are optional with sensible defaults
- Regular timer functionality unchanged

### Breaking Changes

None. This is a pure enhancement that adds functionality without changing existing APIs.

### Upgrade Path

To enable enhanced timer controls in existing implementations:

```typescript
// Before: Basic timer controls
<TimerControls
  timerState={timerState}
  onPause={pauseTimer}
  onResume={resumeTimer}
  onStop={stopTimer}
/>

// After: Enhanced timer controls
<TimerControls
  timerState={timerState}
  onPause={pauseTimer}
  onResume={resumeTimer}
  onStop={stopTimer}
  onMarkComplete={handleMarkComplete}    // Add mark complete handler
  onPrevious={handlePrevious}            // Add navigation handlers
  onNext={handleNext}
  showMarkComplete={hasCurrentAction}    // Show when action exists
  showNavigation={true}                  // Enable navigation controls
  canGoPrevious={canGoPrev}              // Control button states
  canGoNext={canGoNext}
/>
```

Commit message:

Update documentation to reflect improvements in timer extension logic and reliability. Clarify changes in README, enhanced timer controls, and advanced timer controls, emphasizing simplified calculation for time extensions and seamless continuation of timer sessions.

docs/enhanced-timer-controls.md, after:

# Enhanced Timer Controls (V1.1 Feature)

## Overview

The Enhanced Timer Controls feature extends the basic timer functionality with advanced action management capabilities. This addresses ADHD users' need for flexible task completion and better control over their focus sessions.

## New Timer Controls

### Mark Complete Button

**Purpose**: Allows users to mark the current action as complete before the timer expires

**Visual Design**:
- Blue circular button with checkmark icon
- Positioned between pause/resume and stop buttons
- Only visible when `showMarkComplete` is true and an action is active
- Consistent styling with other timer control buttons

**Behavior**:
- Calculates actual time spent on the current action
- Marks the action as completed in the session
- Automatically moves to the next action or completes the session
- Triggers confirmation modal for user feedback

**Keyboard Shortcut**: `Enter` key

### Enhanced Control Interface

The TimerControls component now accepts additional props:

```typescript
interface TimerControlsProps {
  timerState: TimerState;
  onPause: () => void;
  onResume: () => void;
  onStop: () => void;
  onMarkComplete?: () => void;        // New: Mark current action complete
  onPrevious?: () => void;            // New: Navigate to previous action
  onNext?: () => void;                // New: Navigate to next action
  stopLabel?: string;
  showMarkComplete?: boolean;         // New: Controls visibility of mark complete button
  showNavigation?: boolean;           // New: Controls visibility of navigation buttons
  canGoPrevious?: boolean;            // New: Controls previous button enabled state
  canGoNext?: boolean;                // New: Controls next button enabled state
}
```

## Keyboard Shortcuts

The enhanced timer supports comprehensive keyboard navigation:

| Key | Action | Context |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `Space` | Pause/Resume timer | When timer is active |
| `Enter` | Mark current action complete | When timer is active and action exists |
| `Escape` | Stop timer | When timer is active |
| `←` (Left Arrow) | Navigate to previous action | When multiple actions exist |
| `→` (Right Arrow) | Navigate to next action | When multiple actions exist |

### Keyboard Shortcut Display

The timer controls now include a visual guide showing available keyboard shortcuts:

- Dynamically updates based on timer state
- Shows relevant shortcuts only (e.g., "Mark Complete" only appears when applicable)
- Uses `<kbd>` elements for proper semantic markup
- Positioned to the right of the control buttons for easy reference

## Action Navigation Controls

### Previous/Next Action Buttons

**Purpose**: Allow users to switch between actions during a focus session

**Features**:
- Previous button disabled when on first action
- Next button disabled when on last action
- Confirmation modal when switching during active timer
- Automatic timer pause and restart with new action context

**Visual Design**:
- Circular gray buttons with arrow icons positioned on either side of main timer controls
- Smaller size (w-12 h-12) compared to main timer controls for visual hierarchy
- Disabled state with reduced opacity and no hover effects
- Consistent styling with other timer control buttons

**Integration**:
- Controlled via `showNavigation`, `canGoPrevious`, and `canGoNext` props on TimerControls
- Positioned within the main timer controls layout for easy access
- Uses the same confirmation modal system as other navigation methods

## Integration with Action Sessions

### Action Completion Flow

1. **User Triggers Completion**:
   - Clicks "Mark Complete" button
   - Presses `Enter` key
   - Clicks "Complete & Continue" button

2. **Time Calculation**:
   - Calculates actual time spent using drift-corrected elapsed time
   - Accounts for any paused time during the action
   - Rounds up to nearest minute for user-friendly display

3. **Session Updates**:
   - Marks action as completed in action session context
   - Updates total session time spent
   - Syncs progress to dashboard (if online)
   - Stores completion timestamp

4. **Navigation**:
   - Automatically moves to next uncompleted action
   - Starts new timer with next action's estimated duration
   - Completes session if no more actions remain

### Confirmation Modals

**ActionCompletionModal**: Provides feedback when marking actions complete
- Shows action text and time comparison (estimated vs actual)
- Displays next action preview
- Confirms user intent before proceeding

**ActionNavigationModal**: Confirms navigation during active timer
- Warns about interrupting current timer
- Shows target action information
- Allows cancellation to continue current work

## ADHD-Specific Design Considerations

### Cognitive Load Reduction
- **Visual Hierarchy**: Important actions (Complete & Continue) use prominent green styling
- **Contextual Controls**: Only relevant buttons are shown based on current state
- **Clear Labels**: All buttons have descriptive text and ARIA labels

### Flexibility and Control
- **Multiple Completion Methods**: Button click, keyboard shortcut, or combined action
- **Non-Blocking**: Users can switch actions without losing progress
- **Forgiving Interface**: Easy to navigate between actions if priorities change

### Immediate Feedback
- **Visual Confirmation**: Button states change immediately on interaction
- **Progress Updates**: Action completion immediately updates session progress
- **Time Tracking**: Real-time display of actual vs estimated time

## Implementation Details

### Component Structure

```typescript
// Enhanced TimerControls with mark complete and navigation functionality
<TimerControls
  timerState={timerState}
  onPause={pauseTimer}
  onResume={resumeTimer}
  onStop={stopTimer}
  onMarkComplete={handleMarkCompleteClick}  // New prop
  onPrevious={() => handleNavigationClick('previous')}  // New prop
  onNext={() => handleNavigationClick('next')}          // New prop
  showMarkComplete={!!currentAction}        // New prop
  showNavigation={true}                     // New prop
  canGoPrevious={currentActionIndex > 0}    // New prop
  canGoNext={currentActionIndex < actions.length - 1}   // New prop
/>
```

### State Management

The ActionTimer component manages additional state for enhanced controls:

- `showMarkCompleteModal`: Controls confirmation modal visibility
- `showNavigationModal`: Controls navigation confirmation modal
- `navigationDirection`: Tracks intended navigation direction
- `actionStartTimeRef`: Tracks when current action started for time calculation

### Error Handling

- **Network Failures**: Action completion works offline with automatic sync
- **State Corruption**: Graceful fallback to basic timer functionality
- **Invalid Actions**: Validation prevents completion of non-existent actions

## Testing Strategy

### Manual QA Checklist

1. **Mark Complete Functionality**:
   - [ ] "Mark Complete" button appears only when action is active
   - [ ] Button click triggers confirmation modal
   - [ ] `Enter` key works as alternative to button click
   - [ ] Action marked as completed after confirmation
   - [ ] Timer automatically moves to next action

2. **Action Navigation**:
   - [ ] Previous/Next buttons work correctly
   - [ ] Navigation confirmation appears during active timer
   - [ ] Keyboard arrows navigate between actions
   - [ ] Disabled states work correctly at list boundaries

3. **Keyboard Shortcuts**:
   - [ ] All shortcuts work as documented
   - [ ] Shortcut guide updates based on context
   - [ ] No conflicts with browser shortcuts

4. **Time Tracking**:
   - [ ] Actual time calculated correctly including paused time
   - [ ] Action completion updates session progress
   - [ ] Dashboard reflects real-time progress updates

### Accessibility Testing

- **Keyboard Navigation**: All controls accessible via keyboard
- **Screen Reader**: Proper ARIA labels and semantic markup
- **Focus Management**: Clear focus indicators and logical tab order
- **High Contrast**: Controls remain visible in high contrast mode

## Performance Considerations

- **Efficient Updates**: Timer controls only re-render when state changes
- **Debounced Actions**: Rapid button clicks handled gracefully
- **Memory Management**: Event listeners cleaned up on component unmount
- **Offline Support**: All control actions work without network connection

## V1.1 Advanced Timer Controls (NEW)

### Time Extension System

**Purpose**: Allows users to add more time when the timer reaches zero, supporting ADHD users who often need flexible time management.

**Features**:
- **Automatic Extension Modal**: Appears when timer reaches zero
- **Preset Options**: Quick 5, 10, 15 minute extensions
- **Custom Extensions**: User-defined extension amounts (1-60 minutes)
- **Extension Tracking**: Visual history of all extensions added to current action
- **Seamless Integration**: Extensions update timer duration without losing progress
- **Simplified Logic**: Streamlined extension calculation for improved reliability

**Implementation**:
```typescript
// TimerExtensionModal provides comprehensive extension options
<TimerExtensionModal
  isOpen={showExtensionModal}
  onClose={() => setShowExtensionModal(false)}
  onExtend={handleExtendTime}
  onComplete={handleCompleteAndContinue}
  actionText={currentAction?.text}
  currentExtensions={currentActionExtensions}
/>
```

**Technical Details**:
The timer extension system uses a simplified approach for maximum reliability:
- Extensions are added directly to the timer duration
- Remaining time is automatically recalculated by the timer effect
- No complex elapsed time calculations during extension
- Ensures consistent behavior across all timer states

### Action Navigation System

**Purpose**: Enables users to switch between actions during focus sessions with proper confirmation and state management.

**Features**:
- **Previous/Next Navigation**: Arrow buttons to move between actions
- **Smart Confirmation**: Modal appears when switching during active timer
- **Progress Preservation**: Current action progress saved when switching
- **Edge Case Handling**: Proper disabled states at list boundaries
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Left/Right arrow keys for quick switching

**Implementation**:
```typescript
// ActionNavigationModal provides context-aware switching
<ActionNavigationModal
  isOpen={showNavigationModal}
  onClose={() => setShowNavigationModal(false)}
  onConfirm={handleConfirmedNavigation}
  direction={navigationDirection}
  currentActionText={currentAction?.text}
  targetActionText={targetAction?.text}
  currentProgress={progressInfo}
/>
```

### Enhanced Action Management

**Complete & Continue Button**: 
- One-click action completion with automatic progression
- Green styling for positive reinforcement
- Combines action marking with navigation flow
- Handles session completion when no more actions remain

**Action Progress Tracking**:
- Real-time session progress indicator
- Visual completion status with checkboxes
- Time tracking per action with extension history
- Dashboard integration for historical analysis

## Future Enhancements

### Short Term
- **Bulk Action Operations**: Mark multiple actions complete at once
- **Custom Shortcuts**: User-configurable keyboard shortcuts
- **Smart Time Suggestions**: AI-powered extension recommendations

### Long Term
- **Voice Commands**: Voice-activated timer controls for hands-free operation
- **Gesture Support**: Touch gestures for mobile timer control
- **Adaptive Timing**: AI learns user patterns to suggest optimal durations

## Migration Notes

### Backward Compatibility

The enhanced timer controls maintain full backward compatibility:
- Existing TimerControls usage continues to work
- New props are optional with sensible defaults
- Regular timer functionality unchanged

### Breaking Changes

None. This is a pure enhancement that adds functionality without changing existing APIs.

### Upgrade Path

To enable enhanced timer controls in existing implementations:

```typescript
// Before: Basic timer controls
<TimerControls
  timerState={timerState}
  onPause={pauseTimer}
  onResume={resumeTimer}
  onStop={stopTimer}
/>

// After: Enhanced timer controls
<TimerControls
  timerState={timerState}
  onPause={pauseTimer}
  onResume={resumeTimer}
  onStop={stopTimer}
  onMarkComplete={handleMarkComplete}    // Add mark complete handler
  onPrevious={handlePrevious}            // Add navigation handlers
  onNext={handleNext}
  showMarkComplete={hasCurrentAction}    // Show when action exists
  showNavigation={true}                  // Enable navigation controls
  canGoPrevious={canGoPrev}              // Control button states
  canGoNext={canGoNext}
/>
```
