docs/v1.1-advanced-timer-controls.md, before:

# V1.1 Advanced Timer Controls and Action Navigation

## Overview

V1.1 introduces enhanced timer controls that provide users with more granular control over their focus sessions. This includes the ability to mark actions complete early, extend timer duration, and navigate between actions seamlessly.

## Key Features

### Enhanced Action Status Tracking

The `EditableAction` interface has been enhanced with comprehensive status tracking:

```typescript
export interface EditableAction {
  id: string;
  text: string;
  estimatedMinutes?: number;
  confidence?: 'low' | 'medium' | 'high';
  isCustom: boolean;
  originalText?: string;
  status: 'pending' | 'active' | 'completed' | 'skipped'; // Required field
  actualMinutes?: number;
  timeExtensions?: number[];
  completedAt?: Date; // New: Timestamp when action was completed
  skippedAt?: Date;   // New: Timestamp when action was skipped
}
```

### Status Management

#### Action Status States
- **pending**: Action has not been started yet
- **active**: Action is currently being worked on
- **completed**: Action has been finished successfully
- **skipped**: Action was intentionally skipped by the user

#### Timestamp Tracking
- **completedAt**: Records the exact moment an action was marked complete
- **skippedAt**: Records when an action was skipped
- These timestamps enable detailed analytics and progress tracking

### Timer Control Enhancements

#### Mark Complete Functionality
- **Early Completion**: Users can mark actions complete before the timer expires
- **Confirmation Dialog**: Prevents accidental completion with clear action context
- **Time Tracking**: Records actual time spent vs estimated time
- **Keyboard Shortcut**: Press `Enter` to quickly mark current action complete
- **Progress Preservation**: Maintains session progress when completing actions early

#### Time Extension System
- **Flexible Extensions**: Add 5, 10, 15 minutes or custom amounts when timer reaches zero
- **Extension History**: Track all time extensions per action for analytics
- **Seamless Continuation**: Timer continues immediately after extension
- **Extension Tracking**: Store extension data for time estimation improvements

#### Action Navigation
- **Previous/Next Controls**: Navigate between actions with integrated timer controls
- **Smart Confirmation**: Prompts user when switching actions with active timer
- **Progress Preservation**: Maintains current action progress when navigating
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Use arrow keys for quick action switching
- **Edge Case Handling**: Proper behavior at first/last actions

### User Experience Flow

#### 1. Enhanced Timer Interface
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Current Action: Write introduction  │
│ Estimated: 25m | Actual: 18m       │
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│        [Visual Timer Display]       │
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│ [◀ Prev] [⏸ Pause] [✓ Complete] [▶ Next] │
│          [⏹ Stop] [🔊 Sound]        │
└─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

#### 2. Action Completion Flow
1. User clicks "Mark Complete" or presses Enter
2. Confirmation modal shows:
   - Current action details
   - Time spent vs estimated
   - Next action preview
3. On confirmation:
   - Action status → 'completed'
   - completedAt timestamp recorded
   - actualMinutes calculated and stored
   - Automatic navigation to next action

#### 3. Time Extension Flow
1. Timer reaches zero
2. Extension modal appears with options:
   - Quick options: +5m, +10m, +15m
   - Custom input for specific amounts
   - "Complete Action" to finish without extension
3. On extension selection:
   - Timer duration increased
   - Extension recorded in timeExtensions array
   - Timer continues seamlessly

#### 4. Action Navigation Flow
1. User clicks Previous/Next or uses arrow keys
2. If timer is active:
   - Confirmation modal appears
   - Shows current progress and target action
   - User can confirm or cancel navigation
3. On confirmation:
   - Current timer paused
   - Progress saved to current action
   - New action becomes active
   - Timer starts with new action's estimated duration

#### 5. Smart Session Completion
The enhanced navigation system now includes intelligent session completion:
1. **Automatic Detection**: System checks if all actions are completed or skipped
2. **Smart Navigation**: When moving to next action, automatically detects session completion
3. **Seamless Transition**: If session is complete, navigates directly to results page
4. **Progress Preservation**: Ensures no completed actions are lost during navigation
5. **Fallback Handling**: Gracefully handles edge cases like no remaining uncompleted actions

### Keyboard Shortcuts

| Key | Action | Context |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `Space` | Pause/Resume Timer | Timer active |
| `Enter` | Mark Action Complete | Timer active |
| `Escape` | Stop Timer | Timer active |
| `←` | Previous Action | Any time |
| `→` | Next Action | Any time |

### Database Schema Updates

#### Action Status Tracking
The `status` field is now required and must be one of the defined enum values. This ensures consistent state management across the application.

#### Timestamp Fields
New optional timestamp fields provide detailed tracking:
- `completedAt`: ISO string when action completed
- `skippedAt`: ISO string when action skipped

These timestamps enable:
- Detailed session analytics
- Time-of-day productivity insights
- Action completion pattern analysis
- Progress visualization in dashboard

### ADHD-Specific Optimizations

#### Reduced Cognitive Load
- **Clear Visual Feedback**: Status changes are immediately visible
- **Confirmation Dialogs**: Prevent accidental actions while staying lightweight
- **Progress Preservation**: Never lose work due to navigation or completion
- **Flexible Timing**: Extensions accommodate hyperfocus and task switching

#### Positive Reinforcement
- **Completion Celebration**: Visual and audio feedback for completed actions
- **Progress Visualization**: Clear indication of session advancement
- **Time Accuracy**: Show actual vs estimated time to build better estimation skills
- **Achievement Tracking**: Detailed completion data for dashboard insights

### Implementation Status

#### Completed (✅)
- Enhanced EditableAction interface with required status field
- Timestamp tracking for completedAt and skippedAt
- Type safety improvements across timer components
- Integration with existing ActionTimer component
- Smart session completion detection and automatic navigation
- Enhanced handleNextAction logic with session completion awareness
- Intelligent action navigation that skips completed actions

#### In Progress (🚧)
- Timer extension modal implementation
- Action navigation confirmation dialogs
- Keyboard shortcut system integration

#### Planned (📋)
- Advanced analytics using completion timestamps
- Time estimation accuracy improvements based on extension data
- Bulk action status management
- Session replay functionality

### Testing Considerations

#### Manual QA Checklist
1. ✅ Mark action complete early and verify timestamp recording
2. ✅ Skip action and verify skippedAt timestamp
3. ✅ Navigate between actions with confirmation dialogs
4. ✅ Extend timer duration and verify extension tracking
5. ✅ Use keyboard shortcuts for all timer controls
6. ✅ Verify status transitions are properly validated
7. ✅ Check dashboard reflects updated action status data

#### Edge Cases
- First action navigation (Previous button disabled)
- Last action navigation (Next button behavior)
- Timer extension with zero remaining time
- Action completion with multiple extensions
- Status consistency during offline/online transitions

### Performance Considerations

#### Timestamp Management
- Timestamps stored as Date objects in memory
- Converted to ISO strings for database storage
- Efficient comparison operations for analytics
- Minimal overhead for status tracking

#### State Synchronization
- Action status changes trigger immediate UI updates
- Timestamp recording happens synchronously
- Database sync occurs asynchronously to avoid blocking
- Offline changes queued for sync when connection restored

### Future Enhancements

#### Short Term
- Action completion animations and celebrations
- Time extension reason tracking
- Bulk action status operations
- Enhanced keyboard navigation

#### Long Term
- Machine learning from completion patterns
- Predictive time extension suggestions
- Advanced session replay and analysis
- Integration with external productivity tools

## Migration Notes

### Breaking Changes
- `status` field is now required on `EditableAction`
- Existing actions without status will default to 'pending'
- Database migration required for status column

### Backward Compatibility
- Existing timer functionality remains unchanged
- New features are additive and optional
- Legacy action data automatically upgraded
- No changes to core timer API contracts

Commit message:

Update README and advanced timer controls documentation to reflect enhancements in smart session completion and action navigation. Clarify new features including automatic session completion and navigation to results upon session completion.

docs/v1.1-advanced-timer-controls.md, after:

# V1.1 Advanced Timer Controls and Action Navigation

## Overview

V1.1 introduces enhanced timer controls that provide users with more granular control over their focus sessions. This includes the ability to mark actions complete early, extend timer duration, and navigate between actions seamlessly.

## Key Features

### Enhanced Action Status Tracking

The `EditableAction` interface has been enhanced with comprehensive status tracking:

```typescript
export interface EditableAction {
  id: string;
  text: string;
  estimatedMinutes?: number;
  confidence?: 'low' | 'medium' | 'high';
  isCustom: boolean;
  originalText?: string;
  status: 'pending' | 'active' | 'completed' | 'skipped'; // Required field
  actualMinutes?: number;
  timeExtensions?: number[];
  completedAt?: Date; // New: Timestamp when action was completed
  skippedAt?: Date;   // New: Timestamp when action was skipped
}
```

### Status Management

#### Action Status States
- **pending**: Action has not been started yet
- **active**: Action is currently being worked on
- **completed**: Action has been finished successfully
- **skipped**: Action was intentionally skipped by the user

#### Timestamp Tracking
- **completedAt**: Records the exact moment an action was marked complete
- **skippedAt**: Records when an action was skipped
- These timestamps enable detailed analytics and progress tracking

### Timer Control Enhancements

#### Mark Complete Functionality
- **Early Completion**: Users can mark actions complete before the timer expires
- **Confirmation Dialog**: Prevents accidental completion with clear action context
- **Time Tracking**: Records actual time spent vs estimated time
- **Keyboard Shortcut**: Press `Enter` to quickly mark current action complete
- **Progress Preservation**: Maintains session progress when completing actions early

#### Time Extension System
- **Flexible Extensions**: Add 5, 10, 15 minutes or custom amounts when timer reaches zero
- **Extension History**: Track all time extensions per action for analytics
- **Seamless Continuation**: Timer continues immediately after extension
- **Extension Tracking**: Store extension data for time estimation improvements

#### Action Navigation
- **Previous/Next Controls**: Navigate between actions with integrated timer controls
- **Smart Confirmation**: Prompts user when switching actions with active timer
- **Progress Preservation**: Maintains current action progress when navigating
- **Keyboard Navigation**: Use arrow keys for quick action switching
- **Edge Case Handling**: Proper behavior at first/last actions

### User Experience Flow

#### 1. Enhanced Timer Interface
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Current Action: Write introduction  │
│ Estimated: 25m | Actual: 18m       │
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│        [Visual Timer Display]       │
├─────────────────────────────────────┤
│ [◀ Prev] [⏸ Pause] [✓ Complete] [▶ Next] │
│          [⏹ Stop] [🔊 Sound]        │
└─────────────────────────────────────┘
```

#### 2. Action Completion Flow
1. User clicks "Mark Complete" or presses Enter
2. Confirmation modal shows:
   - Current action details
   - Time spent vs estimated
   - Next action preview
3. On confirmation:
   - Action status → 'completed'
   - completedAt timestamp recorded
   - actualMinutes calculated and stored
   - Automatic navigation to next action

#### 3. Time Extension Flow
1. Timer reaches zero
2. Extension modal appears with options:
   - Quick options: +5m, +10m, +15m
   - Custom input for specific amounts
   - "Complete Action" to finish without extension
3. On extension selection:
   - Timer duration increased
   - Extension recorded in timeExtensions array
   - Timer continues seamlessly

#### 4. Action Navigation Flow
1. User clicks Previous/Next or uses arrow keys
2. If timer is active:
   - Confirmation modal appears
   - Shows current progress and target action
   - User can confirm or cancel navigation
3. On confirmation:
   - Current timer paused
   - Progress saved to current action
   - New action becomes active
   - Timer starts with new action's estimated duration

#### 5. Smart Session Completion
The enhanced navigation system now includes intelligent session completion:
1. **Automatic Detection**: System checks if all actions are completed or skipped
2. **Smart Navigation**: When moving to next action, automatically detects session completion
3. **Seamless Transition**: If session is complete, navigates directly to results page
4. **Progress Preservation**: Ensures no completed actions are lost during navigation
5. **Fallback Handling**: Gracefully handles edge cases like no remaining uncompleted actions

### Keyboard Shortcuts

| Key | Action | Context |
|-----|--------|---------|
| `Space` | Pause/Resume Timer | Timer active |
| `Enter` | Mark Action Complete | Timer active |
| `Escape` | Stop Timer | Timer active |
| `←` | Previous Action | Any time |
| `→` | Next Action | Any time |

### Database Schema Updates

#### Action Status Tracking
The `status` field is now required and must be one of the defined enum values. This ensures consistent state management across the application.

#### Timestamp Fields
New optional timestamp fields provide detailed tracking:
- `completedAt`: ISO string when action completed
- `skippedAt`: ISO string when action skipped

These timestamps enable:
- Detailed session analytics
- Time-of-day productivity insights
- Action completion pattern analysis
- Progress visualization in dashboard

### ADHD-Specific Optimizations

#### Reduced Cognitive Load
- **Clear Visual Feedback**: Status changes are immediately visible
- **Confirmation Dialogs**: Prevent accidental actions while staying lightweight
- **Progress Preservation**: Never lose work due to navigation or completion
- **Flexible Timing**: Extensions accommodate hyperfocus and task switching

#### Positive Reinforcement
- **Completion Celebration**: Visual and audio feedback for completed actions
- **Progress Visualization**: Clear indication of session advancement
- **Time Accuracy**: Show actual vs estimated time to build better estimation skills
- **Achievement Tracking**: Detailed completion data for dashboard insights

### Implementation Status

#### Completed (✅)
- Enhanced EditableAction interface with required status field
- Timestamp tracking for completedAt and skippedAt
- Type safety improvements across timer components
- Integration with existing ActionTimer component
- Smart session completion detection and automatic navigation
- Enhanced handleNextAction logic with session completion awareness
- Intelligent action navigation that skips completed actions

#### In Progress (🚧)
- Timer extension modal implementation
- Action navigation confirmation dialogs
- Keyboard shortcut system integration

#### Planned (📋)
- Advanced analytics using completion timestamps
- Time estimation accuracy improvements based on extension data
- Bulk action status management
- Session replay functionality

### Testing Considerations

#### Manual QA Checklist
1. ✅ Mark action complete early and verify timestamp recording
2. ✅ Skip action and verify skippedAt timestamp
3. ✅ Navigate between actions with confirmation dialogs
4. ✅ Extend timer duration and verify extension tracking
5. ✅ Use keyboard shortcuts for all timer controls
6. ✅ Verify status transitions are properly validated
7. ✅ Check dashboard reflects updated action status data
8. ✅ Complete all actions and verify automatic session completion
9. ✅ Navigate to next action when session is complete - should go to results
10. ✅ Verify session completion works with mixed completed/skipped actions

#### Edge Cases
- First action navigation (Previous button disabled)
- Last action navigation (Next button behavior)
- Timer extension with zero remaining time
- Action completion with multiple extensions
- Status consistency during offline/online transitions

### Performance Considerations

#### Timestamp Management
- Timestamps stored as Date objects in memory
- Converted to ISO strings for database storage
- Efficient comparison operations for analytics
- Minimal overhead for status tracking

#### State Synchronization
- Action status changes trigger immediate UI updates
- Timestamp recording happens synchronously
- Database sync occurs asynchronously to avoid blocking
- Offline changes queued for sync when connection restored

### Future Enhancements

#### Short Term
- Action completion animations and celebrations
- Time extension reason tracking
- Bulk action status operations
- Enhanced keyboard navigation

#### Long Term
- Machine learning from completion patterns
- Predictive time extension suggestions
- Advanced session replay and analysis
- Integration with external productivity tools

## Migration Notes

### Breaking Changes
- `status` field is now required on `EditableAction`
- Existing actions without status will default to 'pending'
- Database migration required for status column

### Backward Compatibility
- Existing timer functionality remains unchanged
- New features are additive and optional
- Legacy action data automatically upgraded
- No changes to core timer API contracts
